The universe is a clock
wound since the beginning of Time,
of Everything
each spiral, each galaxy,
each star and planet
whirls and spins it's eternal revolutions
held in place by forces straining
inconstant competition,
balanced, one against the other
slowly, slowly,
running down.
Some philosophers have
seen the image of a clock
as the nearest we can come
to a metaphor for perfect creation,
absolute craft.
Each 'tick' immaculately geared to the next
each 'tock' the answering equivalent.
Behind the face, behind the hands,
is a Universe-in miniature
The Cosmos in a casing.
Balances, bridges, escapements and stems,
turning and springing,
releasing and rolling,
This is the language of time.
Not 'the time'...
TIME.
Once upon a time,
there was a man
who held the Universe in his top pocket.
A universe encased in solid gold,
and crafted entirely by his own two hands.
Big, plate-like hands
hands that were engineered to rebore
the engine of his beloved Bentley,
rather than crafting beautiful,
intricate timepieces.
Yet this passionate, dedicated man
had the vision that was to
make him Master of his trade.
He became known as
the world's greatest living Watchmaker.
For George Daniels, almost any universe
would have been more welcome
than the one he was born into.
A childhood of Dickensian
neglect and poverty.
In a crowded, unruly, unpredictable world,
he became tough, inventive,
sharp and strong.
And then, inexplicably,
an object of great importance
appears in his life,
something quite magical,
something that should not have been a part
of the world he inhabited:
A Pocket Watch.
It is ordered, self contained,
self controlled, self regulating,
and utterly beguiling.
And for the incredible journey
this watch will take him on,
it might as well have
been dropped at his feet
by a fabled white rabbit,
racing onwards to another,
curiouser world.
But... it didn't work
For all its beautiful complexity,
it lacked the movement
that made sense of it's engineering.
So...
he turned to the only
other time piece available
When he takes apart the family alarm clock
it's a dangerous thing to do,
because his parents use that alarm clock.
If they come home
and see him doing that,
he is bound to get a ferocious beating.
But he doesn't care.
He is so driven by this
intense curiosity to see
what is inside that clock.
It reflected his own view of life.
It was independent,
it functioned without
any outside interference
or outside help.
Watches and clocks just stood there,
ticking away.
One of George's greatest achievements
was his invention of
the co-axial escapement,
the first new horological
development in 250 years
and widely accepted as
the most important of the 20th Century.
It took years of focussed, intense effort
to get from that first broken pocket watch
to Master Watchmaker.
But his survivor's instinct
and his obsession with
the mechanical combined,
and from unforgiving materials,
he crafted his life.
As a boy,
I didn't really understand
the purpose of school.
My parents were very keen
that I did very well at school
but I didn't really understand why.
Like wise going through school,
I had very little
awareness of what went on
outside of school life.
I know that at school I
was always very practical:
I always made models-
balsa wood models which I enjoyed making
and always trying to perfect,
but it really wasn't
until my father suggested
that I go on the horology
course in Manchester...
We talked about restoring antique furniture
and he was very keen on that.
So we applied to the school in Manchester,
but unfortunately,
as our application went in,
they decided to cancel the course.
Forever, you know.
So, had to think again
and, in the Manchester
Evening News, I saw this
article about the School
of Horology in Manchester.
I was quite interested in that myself.
It seemed very, very
good, and I came back
and I mentioned it to him
and he said yes, he would
be interested in doing that.
He was full of enthusiasm.
My first day at college
was really my best day of education ever.
It was fantastic.
Really, my life started at that point,
that was a real awakening I suppose.
And from that moment onwards I knew
that this was going to be my life:
Watches, or clocks.
I didn't know what at that point
but I knew it was going
to be one of those two.
After he'd only been at this
Horology School for about a week,
and he was full of enthusiasm,
he'd skeletonised this pocket watch,
which I thought, you know, was pretty keen
he'd done it all in his spare time-
then one evening he wanted to
have a look at a clock.
So he found one of
ours, and he sort of
took it to pieces, took the plates apart,
all the wheels dropped out,
about eight wheels,
with pinions on each end,
fitting between the plates.
So I said 'That's very good,
but what are you going to do now Roger?'
'I don't know!' he said.
'Well I suggest you put it together.'
Knowing that he wouldn't
be able to do this.
But he picked up
one plate in his lefthand,
and just picked these wheels up,
'that one goes there,
that one goes there...
'and that one goes there...'
all eight wheels went in,
and then he just shut it.
Every wheel had gone into
the right pinion hole.
So it seemed the restless young schoolboy
who was so unsure of his future,
had stumbled upon his destiny.
All great watchmakers are historians.
All great watchmakers know
what came before them,
and they tease out of that knowledge
a way forward for themselves.
It starts with the sun.
The great 'sky clock'
was the first regulator,
marking the time when men could hunt,
fish, plant,
or harvest.
Its time in the heavens
determined by the seasons.
But as soon as the regularity
of these phases was noted,
they were measured.
And as soon as measured, put to use.
As every nation developed,
newer technologies were needed.
In navigation, clocks became symbolic of
mankind's ability to
conquer the natural world.
In England, ships were being lost at sea,
well, even around the world
were being lost at sea.
A man called John Harrison,
a very famous English watchmaker,
he managed to create
the very first accurate timekeepers,
which enabled navigators to locate
their position at sea.
But as societies advanced,
as things improved,
from the ships in the 1600's
and through to industrial revolution,
when the railways came,
then obviously, to have a time base
was important across the meridian
and in time zones
so everybody knew that time was the same.
As industrialisation took hold,
the mechanisation of human life took over
and time became the possession
of the factory owner.
Lengths of days were irrelevant:
It was hours worked that mattered.
And suddenly,
your common man needed to make sure
he was at work on time
and that's where mass production started.
And so for the common man,
they became common place.
Whatever symbolic
influence they could claim
was reduced still further
with digital devices
that could tell the time
within millionths of a second,
using a bit of quartz and a battery.
The mechanical timepiece
was made redundant.
From looking at the sky to
gauge our place in the day,
we can see the time anywhere.
We are pursued by beeps and digits,
mobiles and tablets,
PCs and computers,
all of them remote devices
clicking precisely,
showing the numbers
that equate to the time.
And yet...
The position of the hands on the face,
is a far more instinctive
statement of the time.
They represent the
cyclical nature of it all,
from the turning sun to all its sons:
The days, the weeks the seasons,
our lives and deaths.
Time ticks in our veins.
But the success of the digital revolution
was overwhelming.
It takes a particular kind of cussedness
to change the way mankind is moving.
After seeing the world
of mechanical watches
brought close to dissolution,
George Daniels decided
that the world was wrong
and almost single handedly
he revived the craft
of creating handmade timepieces.
He started repairing, restoring,
became an agent for Breguet in London,
and actually made Breguet clocks.
He made two 3-wheel clocks:
Very, very sought after.
Abraham-Louis Breguet
was a very famous French watchmaker.
I suppose he saw the
quality of Breguet's work
and he thought he could improve on it
which quite clearly he did
with the double wheel escapement
and the co-axial escapement.
A timepiece has it's own ticking heart:
The escapement.
A life-giving mechanism
of balance wheels and levers
that transfer energy to
the time-keeping elements of the machine.
They bring it to life.
Many great watchmakers have tried
to perfect this device,
not only to make this heart
stronger and more stable
but to make clocks and watches
more and more accurate.
For two hundred and fifty years
it was Mudge's lever escapement
that reigned supreme.
That is,
until George Daniels decided
he could do better...
You're hard at work I see!
Can you tell me how
you go about all this?
Well, it depends on a
variety of circumstances,
and of course first, one
needs to have the incentive
to make a watch
and usually one thinks of a new idea
or an innovation
that might help effect
an improvement in rate.
- Those are ruby jewels?
- Ruby jewels, yes.
I make those on this
little machine over here,
cut them to my own shapes.
This tooth is locked on the locking stone,
the balance will turn to the right,
carry the lever with it, unlock this wheel,
which will fall onto that stone,
while the tooth here
will fall onto that impulse pallet.
So, it's a fairly fast
moving, complex action.
But I think it will add charm to the watch
when it's completed.
Totally unique George!
Well, it is unique, one only hopes
that it proves beneficial in the end.
You see here are the basic components...
George realised that there was
a fundamental flaw with
the lever escapement,
which is used in all
mechanical watches to date.
And the main problem
with the lever escapement is that
it requires lubrication
in order for it to function correctly.
You do figure all the angles
Well that's vitally important
Precision timekeeping only comes
from meticulously observing
certain functions of the escapement,
if you don't do that, the watch
won't give off it's best performance.
The problem with all lubrication
is that after time its
condition will deteriorate.
Eventually the tooth will find it harder
to push through the thickening oil.
And, because it's now
harder to push through,
it'll affect the rate of
timekeeping of the watch.
So George saw this as being
the major problem with the lever escapement
and what he set about doing was
trying to redesign an escapement
to avoid this sliding action.
George, spent a lot of time
reviving the mechanical watch industry.
And now, the majority of Omega watches
throughout the world
have got George's co-axial escapement.
I was fortunate enough
to meet him in the 1960s
when I first started my career
with a firm called
Camerer Cuss and Company.
I met George
when he used to come in
and talk to old Mr Cuss
about watches and all sorts of things.
So I was thrilled
when I eventually joined Sotheby's
in the late 1970s
to find George was the consultant
and we were able to start
up our relationship again.
He would regularly come
in and have a chat
about his clocks and his watches
and his cars as well.
He'd often bring a watch
that he'd just made to show us.
It was thrilling! We'd all say
'Oh what have you got George?
What's in that pocket?'
It's the fact that he's the
first person for so long
to have produced everything;
every part of the watch, I believe,
apart from the springs
but everything else:
The dials, the cases, the movements.
Nobody else has done that.
No, it's quite remarkable.
Especially as they were
such complicated watches.
I think the ferociousness
that George applied to work,
comes from his childhood.
It was a way he escaped the violence,
he escaped hunger,
he escaped abuse.
He just disappeared into work.
It's a lonely job. If
you look at Riversdale,
when George lived in
Riversdale all by himself,
cooked his meal in the evening,
watched his television,
had lots of visitors,
the house was always alive in that respect.
But when he was in the workshop-no.
Dedicated. Sit in the workshop by himself,
fan heater on,
and work.
And that's how he did it.
George has been heralded as a genius,
a pioneer with a visionary spirit.
The recipient of countless medals
and awards from his peers,
Daniels now ranks among
the horological greats
that he himself was once in awe of.
He single-handedly influenced
the entire horological industry
and will go down in history
as one of the Greatest
Watchmakers of all time.
I first met George
when I was at the college in Manchester,
studying to be a watch and clock repairer
and at that point I didn't
think it was possible
for one person to make a watch.
George came along, and he brought out
this wonderful pocket
watch, 'The SpaceTraveller'
and, on looking at this piece,
you know, I just thought
'What an incredible achievement!
How on earth is it possible? '
Actually, my father, he bought me
for that Christmas,
a copy of George's book 'Watchmaking'.
In it, it tells you how
to make a pocket watch
from start to finish.
On reading the book from
cover to cover several times
I finally realised -
I mean, the book is written so well
and it's so easy to understand,
but I thought well, if
George could make a watch,
then surely I could make a watch?
I approached George
and asked if he would apprentice me.
Anyway, he invited me over to the Island,
told me that he wouldn't,
but nevertheless encouraged me and said
'If you want to make watches,
go away and start
working on one of your own'
He said nobody taught him to do it,
so it is possible.
Upon completing college
Roger went to work at Tag Heuer
and likewise, a year later,
I went and joined him there.
After working full time
probably for 18 months
he went to the company
asked to reduce his hours
to 2 or 3 days a week,
to concentrate on the completion
of his first pocket watch.
Unfortunately, they declined his offer.
So he literally left,
and he found trade work
to fill the gaps and earn the money,
and he completed that first pocket watch
when he was 22,
which was a 'tourbillon', and
that really is unheard of.
Roger is very precise.
He's got endless patience,
sort of an abnormal degree of patience!
When he was at home, when he'd qualified
and he was working
for a watch repair business in Bolton,
in his spare time he
was making a watch -
this one he was hoping to
take to see George Daniels.
I was just earning enough basically
give my parents a bit of rent
pay a loan off for equipment-
I didn't have any spare money basically,
it was a very basic lifestyle.
But I needed to
be cause I was working
12 to 14 hours a
day, 6 days a week
He sets up in his parents garage,
works at making a watch
3 or 4days a week,
and the other days of the week
he works at repairs so
he can earn some money.
Now this is remarkably
like what George did.
The first watch I started making
in my father's garage
I chopped a bit out of it,
and made a little room
only about 10 foot by 6 or 7 foot.
I'd never made components
for a watch before.
But nevertheless I had George's
book 'Watchmaking' to help me.
He'd spend all day
making a tiny little part
and then he'd come in,
in the evening, and say
'I've lost it.' I'd say 'What
do you mean you've lost it?'
'It's on the floor
somewhere, can't find it.'
Most people would just
go out of their minds!
'Well what are you going to do?'
And he'd say 'I'll
have to make it again.'
And sometimes that happened maybe-
I'm not exaggerating! - 2 or 3 times.
Three days totally wasted work.
He just took it all on
the chin, so to speak.
It was very difficult, because
I didn't know how to treat
the materials that I had to work on.
Also, I was learning 32 individual trades
which no watchmaker,
other than George Daniels,
and one or two others
have ever learned, ever achieved.
But nevertheless a watch did come together.
I think the whole process
took about 18 months.
And it was a surprise
when the watch ticked...
and it really only did just tick!
Two years later he goes back to George
after having spent three thousand
five hundred hours making a watch.
It only just worked really.
It was a bit hit and miss
and I was nervous that it may stop
while it was in George's hands.
But, anyway, he had a look at it.
But he wasn't happy.
You could just tell.
I mean, I was hoping
that his face would light
up and say 'Well done',
but,
well he was honest!
He was a bit annoyed really,
that I'd gone over there
and wasted his time
showing him this watch which was
no good.
Now the thing worked, it told the time,
you would think that would be enough?
Not for George.
Telling the time was
never enough for George.
George looked at it and said
'Go away and finish it
properly, it's all about finish'
It looked handmade, not created.
George always believed
you should never see
the hand of the maker
in any mechanical object.
The mark of the maker
has to be completely washed away.
He sent me away, with a
bit of a flea in my ear,
and told me to make another watch.
Being told that you can't do something
then I immediately want to go out
and prove that I can do it.
I just wasn't prepared to let it go.
Making the first watch
took a year and a half,
but the second watch,
I thought, well
if I'm going to spend so much time
learning and perfecting how to make it,
then I have to make it more complicated.
And so I added
a four year perpetual
calendar mechanism on to it.
So it adjusts for every single month,
and then it self-corrects
for the long and shorts,
and also it corrects for your leap year.
So it's a very complicated piece!
But I felt that
that extra complication would give me
the opportunity to practice
and improve the skills that
I was so obviously lacking really.
Roger was willing to gamble with
the most important thing in life-time.
He was willing to gamble
that he could make a great watch.
That is an enormous gamble,
particularly when you're in your early 20s
and you're making tourbillons
and perpetual calendars.
The life of a Master Watchmaker
is a lonely one.
Hours upon hours, minutes upon minutes,
seconds upon milliseconds,
forming and soldering and turning,
tempering and bleaching and buckle making,
springing and timing and finishing and-
well the list goes on.
And on... and on.
Everything created to a standard
that Chronos himself would be pleased with.
These two men
chose to dedicate almost
every waking second
to perfecting this ancient art.
Indeed, even in slumber
they would surely dream
of shaving that last slip of time loss
from their latest mechanism,
creating the ultimate Time Machine.
This is a skill set that
devours the sunlight
for those who choose to master it.
It is an art that is, ironically, timeless,
but one that would have faded
into the annals of history
had George not taken it upon himself
to 'rewind the clock' once more.
And, had the fiery, determined,
young Roger not taken the bait
of the challenge laid out before him,
to snatch the baton waved at him,
and run with it.
They shared an unshakeable obsession
and an immoveable focus.
And yet, like any great pocket watch,
these two characters have more
layers and levels to their complication
than you might at first think.
He did say,
that when he was a watchmaker,
a man learning the trade repairing watches,
he had few friends.
As soon as he bought a vintage Bentley,
he had a hundred friends.
Oh! Rebuild cars?
He was skilled at the
workbench making watches
but he's just as skilled
repairing Bentleys.
He was dedicated in everything he did
Whether it was cars, motorbikes, watches,
clocks or writing.
George would buy a car,
which you and I would
accept as being perfect,
and would rebuild it.
He didn't want any hiccups along the way,
he wanted to have a perfect car.
He didn't win a lot of races, but
every race he took
part in, they were fun.
He would nearly always
end up sideways on the grass, spinning.
'Fear' was something that George Daniels
actually didn't recognise.
It was very hard keeping
up with George in this car
if you had something not quite as fast-
- he was gone, like the wind.
We had some very good outings together
and some hair-raising experiences.
The nearest I've ever
come to death, I think, is
being driven in the
Itala by George Daniels!
But that was George.
He just didn't go out there to win,
he went out there for
the camaraderie, the fun.
It's a privilege to drive
these wonderful machines.
The watchmaker openly professed
that he did not have the necessary patience
required to give personal instruction.
He claimed it was because
he worked too quickly.
He did not want the
burden of an apprentice.
Disparaging about what he saw as the
pervading philosophy of a '9 to 5'culture,
George always believed
that success required great application
and total disregard of the passing hours.
And yet,
somewhere not too far away,
one determined young man,
evidently cut from a similar cloth,
refused to take '
No' for an answer.
The second watch that I made
was the tourbillon pocket watch
and it had a perpetual calendar on it.
It was that watch that I
was making and remaking
over a five and half year period,
and basically, at the
end of the first year,
I found that the components
that I'd just recently made
were of a far poorer quality,
so I'd go back to the beginning
of the watch and remake it.
Eventually - well,
I think my parents
were running out of patience with me
because I was still living
and working at home,
and I think I'd
also got to the stage
where I knew I just couldn't physically
improve on what I was making.
The quality of the parts
I was very happy with.
So it came to the time when
I had to contact George,
and arrange another
visit to the Isle of Man
to show him the watch.
I think in my mind, I'd sort of
thought that if this didn't work,
if this watch wasn't right, then really,
watchmaking for me was sort of finished.
I knew I couldn't really
physically improve on that
so a lot hung on this particular meeting.
I arrived at the allotted
time at the house,
and he invited me in,
into his kitchen, where he
does all his paper work;
this big desk where all
his papers were spread out,
and he just told
me to stand and wait
by the door there.
Anyway, he continued doing his paperwork,
shuffling bits of paper around
and didn't say anything to me.
And that continued for
about five or ten minutes.
Eventually he said 'Right!
Let's look at this watch.'
So he said 'Follow me'.
We left the house and
walked down to the workshop.
On the way, he said:
'Your first watch was
terrible, wasn't it? ',
he said:'I think you knew it was terrible,
I don't know what you were doing
trying to show it to me,
what were you trying to prove? '
how do you reply to that?!
I thought 'this isn't good!'
But anyway, we got into the workshop,
I followed him in here,
and George sat down at the bench, there
and I basically just stood
sort of to his left,
and I put the watch down there,
where that pen is.
And he opened the box.
He wasn't very impressed with the box,
he isn't impressed with boxes.
He took out the pocket watch and
he just held it in his hand,
he put his glasses on
and his magnifying glass,
and he just turned it over in his hands,
and looked at it.
And then he said:
'Who made the pocket watch case for you?'
So I said:'I did'.
Than he turned it around
and he looked and the dial,
and he said:'Where did
you get the dial made?'
So I said:'Well I made the dial'.
And he turned it
around a bit more, then
he opened the back of the watch-
at this point my heart was just
pumping ten to the dozen, you know?
I mean, this was the moment really.
Then he looked at the
mechanism and he said:
'Who made the tourbillon carriage for you?'
So I said:'I did'.
Then he looked at the
escape wheel and said:
'Very nice escape wheel,
where did you get that from?'
So I said:'I made it George!'
And with that, he
just snapped the back to,
put the watch down, stood up,
and he said:'Congratulations,
you're a watchmaker!'
I didn't listen to anything he said
for the next 15 or 20 minutes
as he just paraded around the workshop,
talking really animatedly
and I've never seen this man like that!
He was just talking about watches,
horology and his work,
and my possible future.
My mind was just whirling away, you know?
Here was the end of a seven,
a seven and a
half year sort of quest,
to prove to this man that
I could make a watch.
That was something special.
And so it seemed the solitary watchmaker
was finally relenting.
He gained a worthy apprentice
to join him on his journey,
with whom he could share
his ancient wisdom -
the secret of Time.
In the middle of the Irish Sea,
the Isle of Man stands
at the very centre of the British Isles.
It is independent in attitude,
as much as by constitution.
And has been quietly radical
for over a thousand years.
The past breathes through
the hills, and the shores
and the soil.
Upon the sails of their dragon ships,
the Norse settlers brought with them
the Triskellion symbol,
which is, to this day, embroidered on the
Island's flags as the Three Legs of Man.
It denotes a turning sun -
as apt a metaphor as any
watchmaker could wish for.
It is a symbol which is engraved
on each of Roger's watches.
Perhaps it was the sum of
all its parts and paradoxes
that made the Isle
of Man the perfect home.
Or perhaps George Daniels,
Master Watchmaker,
and Keeper of Time,
was simply seduced by
the Islanders' most loved phrase:
'Traa Dy Liaoor',
meaning:'Time Enough'.
In 1999,
George started the Millennium Project,
and asked Roger to come
to the Island and assist.
I think we were
in France at the time.
He rang up and said George
had been on the phone,
George Daniels, offered him a job,
and he said:'I've accepted'
and I said: 'That's great!'
Well it really was,
because I didn't think
that would ever happen.
Obviously due to his
age he needed the help,
but also he wanted to
pass on the experiences
and the skills which he'd
developed over the years.
George had invented this escapement
which Omega had taken on board,
and he wanted to create a series of watches
around this, this new invention of his.
And so I came over
to the Isle of Man
and started work on assisting George.
He saw in Roger obsession,
gambler, and rebel.
And that is what he
saw in himself as well.
So, seeing that in Roger,
was very comforting for George,
knowing there was another
generation after him.
It's like that scene in
'Star Wars', you know?
Where Yoda says
'No it's alright, there will be another'
when Luke Skywalker goes off-
George looked at Roger and said:'My God,
there's another generation,
isn't that wonderful.'
Obviously, there was a huge age gap.
He was 72 and I
was 28 when I arrived here.
So our lives were very, very different.
There was a lot of banter:
He always used to refer to me,
when things weren't going well, as
'Smith of Bolton',
And then,
obviously he referred to himself as
'Daniels of London'
and that sort of says it
all really, doesn't it?!
'George? I was wondering
if you could have look at this please?
I'm having a few
difficulties with the click'
The first nine months
were incredibly intense,
I mean, really just full on.
At the time he was 72 I think,
but he was still putting in full days,
he expected me to
put in even longer hours.
He basically took me around the workshop,
showing me every single bit of equipment
and just teaching me how to use it
to the standard that he required.
The normal working day
didn't apply to George.
He got up at
6 o'clock in the morning,
went into his workshop,
and came out at 10
or 11 o'clock at night.
Few hours sleep, back in the workshop.
Roger worked for George
for five or so years,
in the workshop, sitting next door to him,
learning all the time.
And under the watchful eye of George.
Roger will tell you about
the time he had making dials
and how George used to
reject them, and say:
'Go away, that's not good'
yet to most people's
eyes they were perfect.
'So where do you want
the point of engagement?'
It was a great experience,
probably the finest
finishing school you could wish for
working with the great man himself.
Watchmaking is a trade,
a craft, an art, profession,
it's all those things.
It's always passed from an individual,
a Master Watchmaker, to apprentices.
It's always been done that way.
Two hundred years ago, apprentices didn't
just learn how to make watches
from Master watchmakers,
they would learn about finance,
how to manage their own workshop,
they would learn how to dress,
they would learn the
social mores of their time,
the Watchmaker might even
find his apprentice a wife.
Now, all that has disappeared
and the only thing we're
left with is pure education.
The Master Watchmaker teaching the
apprentice how to go about making a watch.
And that's been replaced by watch schools.
But it existed in the relationship
between George and Roger Smith,
and it's very very important that it did.
This is George's bench
and really, in my view,
it's probably one of the
most iconic benches in the world.
I mean, every single watch that George made
was made at this bench.
This bench was down in London,
it moved over here
to the Isle of Man,
the Co-Axial Escapement
was built on this bench,
and many other of his incredible pieces.
All the hand tools all around the back,
plenty of files for all
the components and so on,
and of course his infamous
glasses and eyeglass.
What George wanted out of me
was to be able to make his watches
to the standard he required.
So it was serious work.
I obviously wanted to,
you know, wanted to make
the very best I could
and if I could be accepted
by George, then really
you know, I hoped that my future
would be a little bit easier.
For me, when I
was here in the workshop,
I kept fairly quiet and
just soaked everything up.
I was like a big sponge really.
And if I wasn't working,
we used to often go out
to the pub for lunch,
I'm afraid I just barraged him
with questions about his whole life.
I wanted to get as much
out of the whole experience
as he probably did from me.
So it was a good two-way relationship.
George proved it could be done,
he proved that, in this age,
when we have all of these big brands
with all this money behind them,
you can still be an independent watchmaker.
Our entire lives are
structured around time.
We take it for granted,
Minute after minute, hour after hour,
year after year.
What type of man dedicates his life
to taking this human concept and
creating its physical reality?
And then elevating watchmaking beyond this,
into an art form?
George was all about perfection
and the best quality,
and Roger's the same, you can
see it in Roger's work now.
He was always incredibly demanding.
He was always aware of the
fact that he was the best
and he expected the
best from everyone else.
I'm afraid, there's always this
obsessive streak that I have
that just says: When I
finish the next watch,
that little component will be better.
Or, there's a little mark there,
I don't think anybody else would notice it,
but I notice it
and it's put in the memory bank.
So the next piece is...
you're always trying for perfection.
I don't think with this job
you're every totally happy!
There's something we have
to bear in mind about Roger,
He's 42 years old today
it's 2012, I think it's
42 or maybe 43 -
how old was George when he sat down
and made his first watch?
42.
Now, Roger's been making
watches for 20 years.
What's going to happen
over the next 20 years?
What is Roger going to do?
So Roger's got a long way to go,
but I'm sure it's going
to be very interesting.
And it is not going to be
a slavish imitation of George,
it hasn't been so far,
I'm sure it won't be in the future.
I'm certainly similar
in some areas, but not all
I mean George was
quite an extraordinary man
Very big shoes to fill.
To do what these individuals do,
whether it's Roger or George
or other independents,
it requires a huge amount of dedication,
and perseverance,
and a certain personality,
because one is on one's own
for a large amount of time.
When I was learning about horology,
I used to stand behind George,
and just watch, don't
enter into conversation.
Ask questions afterwards,
because you just see the
dedication of one man.
Roger works in the
workshop with other people,
most other watchmakers do,
but George has only ever
worked in the workshop
by himself, or with Roger.
For me, the ultimate came when
one day he took me out
for lunch to the pub,
and he asked if I would assist him in
making this Anniversary wristwatch,
and that, for me, was a turning point,
knowing that he could trust me
to make a watch for him.
And that's, yes, been wonderful.
The last twenty odd years,
all I've thought about
is trying to create what we're now doing.
It's been a total obsession.
And it's been at the consequence
of everything else in my life really.
I don't think you're ever really satisfied
with what you've achieved.
You know, it's always a continual quest.
Now we're increasing
the size of my workshop
and taking on new watchmakers,
it's always the next challenge really.
And I think that's what makes it exciting.
As one gets older, one is very aware
that one has to live every day,
and one of my mottos
in life is 'Carpe Diem'
'Seize the moment'.
I think it's very important
to seize the moment of time
and not let that time be wasted.
And I think - it sounds a bit cheesy!
But I think
'Time' is too precious
to be wasted on a cheap wristwatch.
You can go and buy for a
watch for a couple of quid,
but George's watches were
actually works of art,
to look at them, to gaze
into George's watches
is like gazing into his very soul.
Every single part is George,
they are so beautiful.
A lot of things today in the society
we live in are very disposable,
you know, you buy it,
it stops working, you throw it away.
These watches are built in such a way
that hopefully they will last forever,
even when Roger and George are long gone.
They can be serviced
by any good watchmaker,
my children, or my children's children
can take them along, and so they'll
stand the passage of time.
That's important.
I don't think his life was smooth,
he actually drove himself.
There was stress in his life at times,
but he got over it, he
was a very strong man,
don't forget that he probably
nearly died 4 or 5 times
from every disease known to
man, but he got over them
because he had this courage
and this strength of purpose
to fight on with everything.
The Anniversary piece -
I started discussing it with George
about three years ago.
And the intention was that,
should he, should he die,
then we would carry on with that project.
Fortunately he saw the piece
several weeks before he passed away.
There is a time for everything
and a season for every
activity under the heavens.
A Time to be born,
and a Time to die;
a Time to plant,
and a Time to uproot;
a Time to kill
and a Time to heal;
a Time to tear down,
and a Time to build;
a Time to weep,
and a Time to laugh;
a Time to mourn
and a Time to dance;
a Time to embrace
and a Time to refrain from embracing;
a Time to search,
and a Time to give up;
a Time to keep and
a Time to throw away;
a Time to be silent,
and a Time to speak;
a Time to love,
and a Time to hate;
a Time for war,
and a Time for peace.
And a Time for peace.
One thing that George did - one of
the extraordinary things that he did,
was that he was
the first person in history
to have ever made a watch
from start to finish.
You don't get that today in the industry.
Certainly, learning how to make
pocket watches by hand
using George's methods,
I've learnt that also.
If I can pass
that on to other people,
through the apprentices
that we now have working with me,
that would be great.
If, here on the
Isle of Man, we can
start a small community of watchmakers,
producing very small quantities of watches,
but to an extra-ordinarily high level,
a level that you just can't
get in mass production.
If, by the time I die,
I can have achieved that,
then that would be great.
Every watchmaker knows
that he is perfecting
the measurement of his own mortality.
The turning hands on a
watch are symbols for
the revolutions that spin out man's span;
the hands turn, the sun
rises, apogees, sets,
moons change, days renew.
It is Man that ends.
But his works can endure.
Perhaps the nicest thing,
is that, in George's will,
he's left the total
contents of his workshop
a lifetime's collection of equipment,
everything in the
workshop is left to Roger.
And I spoke to George before his death,
about his wishes, and he was absolutely
clear in his own mind
that Roger was the future.
'I was George's Apprentice'
he's the only one who can say that,
nobody else can ever say it.
Watch this space, you'll see him
rise to the levels of George.
I suppose, for George to have said,
'You're good enough to do that'...
that's...
yes...
good, yes...